Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. Frederik Pohl knows science fiction as few other people do.
He's been an editor of science fiction books and magazines, an agent who's
handled the biggest names in the field, and an author who's won numerous Hugo
and Nebula awards. With such a background, Pohl is uniquely qualified to comment
on science fiction. One of the things that impresses him the most is the way
science fiction has changed and diversified since he began writing in the 1930s.
Science fiction today is not only very different from what it was in the 30s,
it's very different from other kinds of science fiction today. One of the things
that attracts me to science fiction is that there are so many different kinds of
it. There are books like the one I mentioned before, Dahlgren, which are not a
bit like the ones by Doc Smith, the Skylark stories, the Lenzman stories, which
are not a bit like the ones by Ursula Le Guin, which are not a bit like the ones
by Larry Niven, for example. And I think that science fiction is characterized
by variety. There are very few general statements you can make about science
fiction. It isn't fiction about science. It isn't fiction about the future. It
isn't fiction about space travel. It's fiction which has to do more than
anything else with change. Somebody asked Arthur Clarke once why he wrote
science fiction. And he said something like, because it's the only literature
that concerns itself with reality. Pohl believes science fiction's emphasis on
change can be beneficial. I think anybody who reads science fiction is very
likely to be overcome by future shock. Well, when the atomic bomb fell on
Hiroshima, there were only about 10,000 people in the world who understood what
had happened. About 500 nuclear physicists and the rest were all science fiction
fans. And I think the same has been true about the space program and about many
of the social developments of the last 20 or 30 years. And I think that if you
read enough science fiction, you begin to get a spectrum of the possible futures
that lie ahead for all of us. And I think it's quite useful in the sense that it
lets you make decisions now about which ones of them you would like to avoid or
which ones you would like to avert. And it helps you find ways of taking actions
now that will encourage the good ones and discourage the bad ones. But it's not
just that. I think science fiction also has a good deal of entertainment of what
is to me an extremely pleasurable kind to offer. Since the days of the pulp
magazines in the 1920s and 1930s, science fiction has been a separate category
of literature. Some readers have scorned it as shallower second class. Pohl
believes that the book publishers are responsible for keeping science fiction
separate. He also disagrees with the notion that science fiction is in any way
inferior. The publishing industry is responsible for that. And in some ways,
it's a bad thing. A lot of people in this world like to read books but are
prejudiced against anything that has the word science fiction on it. As I think
it's... I've forgotten the person who wrote the poem. There's a little poem
about it which says something like, If it's science fiction, I don't like it.
And if I like it, it can't possibly be science fiction. Because there are a
great many science fiction novels that everybody loves. They just don't admit
they're science fiction. The Great New World in 1984. And so on. Finally, Pohl
believes that science fiction is uniquely qualified to treat any possible
subject matter. I think science fiction has special qualifications to act as a
vehicle for discussing anything that affects the human being. It's a way of
looking at the human race from outside objectively. It's a way of... It's a sort
of game-playing mechanism for seeing what would happen to human beings under
conditions that haven't occurred yet but are very possible. And I think that
that's probably one of the strongest factors accounting for the continual growth
and interest in science fiction that seems to have been going on as long as I've
been alive.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. Frederik Pohl has been a part of science fiction for almost
50 years. He knows the field as few others do, since he's been a fan, an author,
an agent, and an editor. He recalls what got him interested in science fiction
back in the 1930s. Well, I think it was basically the adventure, the kind of
science fiction that was being published around 1930, when I first got in touch
with it. When I first discovered that it existed, it was mostly space opera and
gimmick stories and the stories about exciting, adventurous exploits all over
the galaxy. And that was in the middle of the Great Depression, and science
fiction looked an awful lot better to me than the real world that I could see.
Pohl probably fulfilled a fantasy of his own when he became a science fiction
editor when he was 19. I was lucky enough to fall into a job as a professional
magazine editor. When I was 19, I had asked an editor I knew, because I'd been
trying to sell him stories without success, if he needed an assistant. And he
was kind enough not to laugh out loud. I didn't know at the time that not very
many science fiction magazine editors could afford assistance. But he mentioned
to me another publishing company that was expanding and suggested I get in touch
with them. So I did. It was popular publications, one of the biggest pulp houses
of the time. And they were expanding, and they gave me a job at $10 a week to
edit two professional science fiction magazines. $10 wasn't so bad. They hired
other editors for nothing at the same time. Many of today's well-known writers
published some of their early work with Pohl. Well, I published a lot of Isaac
Asimov stuff because we were close friends. A few of Robert A. Heinlein's
stories that his primary market, John Campbell, for one reason or other, didn't
want to print. And Henry Kuttner and A.E. Van Vogt and Cleve Cartmill and L.
Sprague de Camp. And most of the people who were writing at that time wound up in
my magazine, not always with their best stories. In fact, very often with their
worst stories, because I wasn't paying very much. I had a budget of about half a
cent a word. In the 60s, Pohl edited Galaxy, one of the principal science
fiction magazines of its era. Much of the best science fiction of that period
went through Pohl. His comments on how an editor deals with his authors are
revealing. Writers are very diverse human beings. Some of them respond to long
letters of criticism and suggestions and patting on the back or beating over the
head. And some of them do not want any outside influence at all. One of my
favorite writers told me early in our relationship that he was willing to have
me buy some stories and reject others, but he didn't want to hear why. If I sent
it back, just send it back and say no. And not tell them what I didn't like
about it, because that upset them. Other writers wanted to know in great detail
not only what I didn't like, but what I did like. And also there are some
writers who are very responsive to money, and some to whom money means nothing
at all. Not that they are immune to it, but they don't want to think in those
terms. And there are some writers who respond to a lot of personal attention,
and some who really want to be left alone. And I had to find out something about
each writer to find out the best way to deal with them. One person Pohl
discovered and encouraged is one of science fiction's best-selling authors
today, Larry Niven. I published his first story, which is a very short one, for
which he got a very short paycheck, and his next one was a little longer, and he
got a little more, and the next one was quite a lot longer, and he got quite a
lot more. And Larry said that if it hadn't been for those three events in that
order, he could not have gone on being a writer. So I take some pride in the
fact that I was instrumental in making it possible for him to devote his time to
writing. For many reasons, we can be grateful Frederik Pohl was a science
fiction editor.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. One of the best known of all science fiction novels is a
collaboration between two authors, Frederik Pohl and Cyril Kornbluth. The novel
is The Space Merchants. Published in 1951, the book is a clever social satire, a
form of writing not often found in science fiction. Huge advertising agencies
run the United States. It's a classic example of extrapolation, one of the major
techniques of science fiction. Frederik Pohl had the original idea for the
book. He recalls where it came from. When I was in the Army, in the Air Force in
World War II, I had some spare time on my hands in Italy, and I decided to write
a novel. And the most interesting subject I could think of was the advertising
industry. So I wrote a whole novel about advertising. Very bad novel. After the
war was over, I took it out and looked at it and realized that it was pretty
bad. And one of its great defects was that I didn't know anything about
advertising. So I went to the New York Sunday Times and looked in the classified
section and found a couple of people advertising jobs in advertising and applied
and got one of them and spent about three years as an advertising copywriter.
During that time, I looked over this old novel again and realized that it had
many more faults than ignorance. And I burned it, and I had all the basic
information about advertising and no novel to put it in. So I thought of writing
a science fiction novel. And it turned out to be The Space Merchant. Before the
war, Pohl had belonged to a science fiction group in New York called the
Futurians. One member of that group was Cyril Kornbluth. He and Pohl had
collaborated before on science fiction stories. Pohl describes their method.
Mostly what Cyril and I did was to, let's see, we wrote seven novels and a
number of short stories together. Generally speaking, what we did after the war,
after the space merchants, and we began writing novels more often than short
stories. Cyril would come out to my house in Red Bank, New Jersey, where we kept
the room for him with his own typewriter, and we'd sit around and talk for a
while and discuss general areas we were interested in writing about, maybe some
characters. And then we'd flip a coin, and the loser would go up to the third
floor and write the first four pages. And he'd come down and say, you're on, and
the other person would go up and write the next four pages. And if you do that
about 25 or 30 times, you have the rough draft of a complete novel. Everything
got radically rewritten after that, because the rough draft was pretty rough,
but structurally it was all there. Kornbluth helped Pohl finish the space
merchants. Cyril Kornbluth was a close friend of mine. We'd collaborated before
the war, before we both went into service. And after I'd written about a third
of it, because the magazine editor wanted it in a hurry, I asked Cyril if he
wanted to help me with it, and he and I collaborated on it from that on. At the
end of The Space Merchants, the protagonist, Mitch Courtenay, leaves an Earth
which is totally disgusting. There is no individual freedom. Food and energy are
strictly rationed. Mitch heads for Venus with the idea of starting fresh, but
the ending is ambiguous. Is it hopeful or not? I left it ambiguous partly
because I wasn't feeling very positive at the time. The novel was written in
1952 and thereabouts, which was a pretty grimy period in the history of this
country. It was the McCarthy years and the Cold War years, and things did not
look too, they didn't look even as good as they do now, as a matter of fact. So
I wasn't feeling optimistic. I didn't mean to foreclose the possibility of a
happy ending. Actually, the novel had two endings. There was a different ending
in the magazine version. More upbeat, but less organically related to the rest
of the novel. It was put in at the insistence of the magazine editor.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. In 1978, Frederik Pohl won a rare double
honor in science fiction. It was in that year his book Gateway won both the Hugo
and Nebula Awards as the best science fiction novel of the year. The Nebula is
voted on by other science fiction writers, so Pohl's peers had high praise for
the book. And the Hugo results from the votes of science fiction fans and
readers, so they also thought Pohl's novel to be exceptional. Both groups have
good reason to think Gateway was something special. It's an exciting narrative
set against the background of a superior alien civilization. But the twist in
Gateway is that the aliens, called the Heechee, have vanished. Humans have
discovered some of their abandoned technology, though. And that technology is
impressive, but dangerous. Humans find portals or gates in the fabric of space,
and special Heechee ships nearby which can travel through those gates to various
places around the universe. But the daring few who travel in the Heechee ships
usually don't know where they'll end up, or what they'll find when they arrive,
or if they'll get back. But for those who return, the rewards can be enormous.
They usually arrive with fabulous Heechee artifacts, remnants of the superior
Heechee technology, which make the travelers rich. Right. Sort of a cosmic
jackpot with a large risk involved. Pohl offers some of the reasons why Gateway
turned out so well. Well, one of the big things in Gateway was that I was under
no pressure from anyone but myself to do it the way I thought it should be done.
I had my publisher at that time, a principal publisher, was a man named Ian
Ballantine, who offered me a contract with a substantial advance to write a novel
without saying what the novel was going to be, and without imposing any deadline
on when I had to deliver it. So I didn't have to discuss it with an editor ahead
of time or write an outline and limit myself and the opportunities I could take.
And I didn't have the pressure of getting it delivered at a specific date to
make me rush it through. And actually, it took me, I think, six years from the
time I signed the contract until I delivered it, and I had been mulling it over
for several years before that. All in all, I think the book was something like
ten years in the gestation. And also, it's not possible for a writer to produce
at the same level all the time. I don't know why. There are times when I write
better than others. I can't relate them to any outside influence or to my
resolution to do well or anything like that. I just know that sometimes it comes
out better than other times, and Gateway, I think, is one of the times when it
came out very well.
The response to Gateway was strong enough to convince Pohl to write a sequel,
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon. I wasn't too hard to convince, but I did not have
any such plan. I know that Gateway leaves a lot of questions unanswered and
suggests a lot of things that are not made explicit in the novel. And I did all
that on purpose, but not for the sake of preparing the way for a sequel,
but just because I think that's a characteristic of
a lot of good science fiction. When you finish the story, you think of things
that let you write your own stories after it. I mean, that's the sort of thing
that Arthur Clarke does very well. And I think I try to do it whenever I can.
And it just turned out that there was a lot of public pressure to write a
sequel. Beyond the Blue Event Horizon answers many of the questions about the
Heechee that Gateway raised. And in that book, mankind even discovers what is
probably the last surviving Heechee, though it's found living in a symbiotic
relationship with a huge machine. Pohl resolved many of the questions about the
Heechee technology and revealed more about what had happened to the vanished
Heechee civilization. But there are still questions about the Heechee not answered
in Beyond the Blue Event Horizon. We asked Pohl about a sequel to that book.
There's also been public pressure to write another sequel, and I'm just about to
sign a contract to do that, but I swear I had no such intention when I finished
Beyond the Blue Event Horizon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Frederik Pohl writes different kinds of
science fiction. All of it exciting. He's written action-packed space opera,
like the Starchild trilogy he did with Jack Williamson, and some of his more
recent work, like Gateway, fall into that category. But Pohl also creates
thoughtful science fiction with the emphasis on social comment. It's just as
fascinating in its own way. The Space Merchants is the best example of that
type. Yes, that book goes back to the 50s, but recently he's written two fine
novels with social emphasis, Jem and Man Plus. Published in 1976, Man Plus
depicts the world in turmoil, with political intrigue, international mistrust,
and the threat of nuclear devastation. Very negative picture. Pohl's suggested
solution is to get man off the Earth to Mars. Pohl envisions a combination of
man and machine, a cyborg, adapting to the red planet and becoming native to
that planet. I didn't make up the cyborg. It was, the term and the concept was
invented by two Air Force or NASA, I've forgotten which researchers, in 1958 or
thereabouts. And it's been used widely in a lot of places, but I didn't make it
up. I think that we already see cyborgs in the sense that a lot of people have
mechanical parts keeping them alive, pacemakers and artificial plastic veins and
arteries and so on. Not to mention things like glass eyes and prosthetic limbs
and false teeth and so on. But ironically, it's not humans who conceive of the
cyborg, but machines. To save man from himself, computers all over the world
link up to form an artificial intelligence. Too far out? Not necessarily, says
Pohl. It's a 50-50 chance, in my opinion, whether machine intelligence can ever
develop these sort of independent, self-defining goals that human beings can't.
But I don't think it's impossible. It's just that machines have not yet got that
smart. Jem, published in 1979, also presents a chaotic world, which this time
succeeds in destroying itself. But some humans have escaped Earth. They're on
another planet and have formed a fragile new society in combination with some
aliens they meet there. Pohl meant the ending to be upbeat. Well, I think that
it's hopeful. I think that what I was trying to say in Jem was perhaps a little
more overt preaching than I usually intend. And I'm not sure that it came across
the way I intended it to. But the subtitle of Jem is The Making of a Utopia. And
what I was trying to say in the novel is that you can't really plan a utopia.
You cannot construct a society that will make everybody happy and productive and
glad to be alive. Because the happiness, satisfaction, productivity are not a
state. They're a process. And no rigid system can survive giving people maximum
opportunities to realize their potential without being flexible and changeable.
Much of Pohl's social science fiction deals with negative societies. But Pohl
says he's basically an optimist. And there's a reason for focusing on the bad
side. I'm really Pollyanna. I'm a great optimist about the world. I think that
we're in for some terrible times. And I don't think that most of us will enjoy
much of what happens in the next few years. But I think in the long run the
human race will straighten itself out and learn to be able to live better with
each other. But as far as writing a novel is concerned, it's not too interesting
to write about a utopia. I mean, what are you going to say about a bunch of
people who walk around in togas and eat whole wheat bread and never have any bad
thoughts? It's much more interesting to paint the disasters that may occur as a
sort of... Well, I think it's Kingsley Amis who calls that kind of science
fiction cautionary literature. It's not saying what will happen. It's just
warning what might happen if we don't watch out.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.